History of self-driving vehicles
================================

A future with self-driving cars was first envisioned as early as 1918, with the
idea even broadcasted over television as early as 1958. By 1988, Carnegie
Mellon’s NAVLAB vehicle was being demonstrated to perform lane-following using
camera images. Development was accelerated when several research teams later
developed more advanced driverless vehicles for competing in the competitions
organized by the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA).

The first, named DARPA Grand Challenge, was realized at the Mojave Desert, USA,
in 2004, and required driverless cars to navigate a 142 mi long course
throughout desert trails within a 10 h time limit. All competing cars failed
within the first few miles.

The DARPA Grand Challenge was repeated in 2005 and required robotic cars to
navigate a 132 mi long route through flats, dry lake beds, and mountain passes,
including three narrow tunnels and more than 100 sharp left and right turns.
This competition had 23 finalists and 4 cars completed the route within the
allotted time limit. The Stanford University’s car, “Stanley”, claimed first
place, and the Carnegie Mellon University’s cars “Sandstorm” and “Highlander”
finished in second and third places, respectively.

The third competition, known as the DARPA Urban Challenge, was held at the
former George Air Force Base, California, USA, in 2007, and required
self-driving cars to navigate a 60 mi long route throughout a simulated urban
environment, together with other self-driving and human driven cars, within a 6
h time limit. The cars had to obey California traffic rules. This competition
had 11 finalists and 6 cars completed the route within the allotted time limit.
The Carnegie Mellon University’s car, “Boss”, claimed first place, the
Stanford University’s car, “Junior”, finished in second, and the Virginia
Tech’s car, “Odin”, came in third place. Even though these competitions
presented challenges much simpler than those typically seen in everyday traffic,
they are being hailed as milestones for the development of self-driving cars
and the research related to self-driving has since continued at a fast pace in
academic settings, but furthermore is now receiving considerable attention in
industry as well.

As research in the field of autonomous vehicles has matured, a wide variety of
impressive demonstrations have been made on full-scale vehicle platforms. Recent
studies have also been conducted to model and anticipate the social impact of
implementing autonomous Mobility-on-Demand (MoD). The case studies have
shown that MoD system would make access to mobility more affordable and
convenient compared to traditional mobility system characterized by extensive
private vehicle ownership. Autonomous driving on urban roads has seen tremendous
progress in recent years, with several commercial entities pushing the bounds
alongside academia. Google has perhaps the most experience in the area, having
tested its fleet of autonomous vehicles for more than 2 million miles, with
expectation to soon launch a pilot MoD service project 'Waymo' using 100 self-driving
vehicles. Tesla is early to market their work, having already provided an
autopilot feature in their 2016 Model S cars. Uber’s mobility service has grown
to upset the taxi markets in numerous cities worldwide, and has furthermore
recently indicated plans to eventually replace all their human driven fleet with
self-driving cars, with their first self-driving vehicle pilot program already
underway.

There are several places where automated road shuttles are in commercial
operations. Examples include deployments at Rivium Business Park, Masdar City,
and Heathrow Airport. The common feature of these operations is that road
vehicles are certified as a rail system meaning that vehicles operate in a
segregated space. This approach has been necessary due to legal uncertainty
around liability in the event of an accident involving an autonomous vehicle. To
address this, governments around the world are reviewing and implementing new
laws. Part of this process has involved extended public trials of automated
shuttles, with CityMobil and CityMobil2 being among the largest of such projects.

To gauge the level of autonomy of self-driving cars, SAE International (formerly
simply SAE, or Society of Automotive Engineers) published a classification
system based on the amount of human driver intervention and attentiveness
required by them, in which the level of autonomy of a self-driving car may range
from level 0 (the car’s autonomy system issues warnings and may momentarily
intervene but has no sustained car control) to level 5 (no human intervention is
required in any circumstance).

In this report, we focus on vehicles (defined in the *Intriduction* section)
which are equipped with an autonomy system that can be categorized as SAE level
3 or higher.
